Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbivill.
This week and next week you will hear just part of the incredible story of service, the
first Sergeant Jeffrey Bailey of Brian, a 20-year Army veteran who served overseas in Germany
twice.
In Korea and two tours of Vietnam, first with the 18th Army of Vietnam infantry and later
with the 12th CAF.
He was wounded during each Vietnam deployment, Ernie II Purple Hearts and the Silver Star,
among many other awards and medals.
Between his Vietnam tours, he served on the streets of South Side Chicago, helping to
diffuse the devastating riots and the days following the April 4, 1968 assassination
of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
He also served three years at Fort Greley, Alaska on the edge of the Arctic Circle.
As you can imagine, his is a remarkable story of service and we welcome Jeffrey Bailey
to Veterans of the Valley.
Jeffrey, thank you for being with us.
It's an honor to know you and to talk to you.
Let's get you into the service.
I know you grew up in Bentley, just down the road.
You graduated from high school in Hurrin in 1951 and entered the service in December of 1952,
went to Fort Hood for your basic.
First overseas deployment was Germany.
Talk about that because you told me that Germany was a good place for the American soldier
to be at this time because it was only eight years removed from World War II.
Talk about that.
Well, that's correct.
It was a wonderful place to be.
The beginning of a 20-year adventure for me.
Most of it enjoyable.
All of it a learning exercise.
Exactly.
I grew up in Bentley as you indicated on the family farm there.
I grew up in high school graduating from Blackshire High School.
In Germany, what you realize is that the emphasis in high school was placed on European history.
So you know about the power of London in the nightlife of Paris and the artistry and
so forth.
So you're anxious to see these things that you have studied and read about.
That made it an exciting thing.
First of all, you get to live the experience you have been studying.
But it was a great time to be there for several reasons.
Number one was kind of economic.
I think the ratio of marks per dollar was somewhere around 12 to 15 at that time.
You could buy much more food and services with your money.
But it was fairly close to World War II within the decade or the end of World War II.
And it was amazing to see the devastation that is caused by war.
And the German cities, manufacturing facilities were all totally destroyed.
And it was my first time of seeing the female population of any country physically work
doing a man's work.
Rebuilding of the streets and infrastructure was the 80% of it by female.
The place in the building of the streets, for example, the old streets primarily were
of cobblestone like 6x6 square.
And how women out there manhailing these cobblestone and laying them in place and physically
doing the work.
It was amazing.
There were other advantages.
As you know, we have just negotiated a status of force agreement with the Iraqis.
We hadn't reached that point yet in Germany.
At that time, the Germans were not allowed to be armed.
They couldn't handle weapons.
They couldn't arrest you.
You were held accountable for your action, but not by the German courts, by the military.
So it was kind of nice being there at that time.
And indeed, you were an occupational force in Germany.
We were an occupational army.
That was your job.
And you personally were heavy weapons infantry, mortar puttons.
Mortar puttons.
Mortars.
On the 81 mortars initially and graduated to the 4 deuces, which is the biggest mortar
that the army had, which is equivalent to 105 millimeter house in diameter and destruction
just doesn't have quite the range.
Right.
And of course, the first infantry had been in Germany since 1941.
But since the beginning of the U.S. involvement in the war.
The first division into Germany.
And the historic history you wouldn't believe.
Just listening, if you expose to the history of the history of the first infantry division,
you become a support of them.
Right.
You have the largest graveyards in France as an example.
Had more people, they like to be first and everything.
And they were first and death.
Combat death.
Exactly.
First across the Rhine River infantry division, the first to breach the sick free line,
the first to do all of these things.
When I got there, the mission is impressed upon you in such a fashion that you don't forget
it because the mission of the first infantry division at that time was to hold a line for
one hour.
That hour was to allow evacuation of civilians.
That you would make your way on your own back south of the Rhine River.
You left Germany, went back to the States, Fort Riley.
Your enlistment was up in 1956.
You got out, you re-enlisted.
First armor, Fort Polk Louisiana.
But I want to talk about your next really significant deployment.
And that was to Alaska, where you went to Fort Greeley as part of the Cotton and Larmy
Command.
What do you think about what your duties were there?
You tested everything for cold weather, right?
Yes.
I was with the Arctic Test Board.
We came on the Cone Art Command, which was Cotton and Larmy Command.
So that puts you up there on a fairly short list of chain of command between you and the
Chief of Staff of the Army.
And headquarters was in, I believe, in Fort Monroe, Virginia at that time.
My job specifically was the mortar test in CO.
I was in the mortar and test, more than chemical test section.
And we tested all of the weapons for the mortars and the chemical weapons.
Right.
We did the cold weather test work on, as an example, the present day gas mass.
I think they still used one with the two cheeks.
Right.
And the oldest.
Prior to that, it had been the old mass with one kind of stone on the left cheek.
We tested the new, we tested the ammunition for the four-douce mortar and the 81 mortar
to give them increased range and more lethality.
We also tested other equipment.
We helped because you have to have ex-number of people doing things.
We did work in conjunction with the quartermaster section on overwired boots.
That's what we call them.
You didn't even put them on if it was above 20 below zero.
And they would keep your feet warm.
We did an over-black boot that you wore if it was 20 percent in high end.
That was exciting work.
And finally, we did the work on the special weapon, the battalion commanders, the infantry
battalion commander had accessibility to an atomic weapon.
It was called the David Crocket.
We didn't test the warhead.
We only tested the delivery system and haul around the warhead for just for cold weather
treatment.
We didn't physically test the weapon.
Right.
It's been three years in Alaska, so you went through a...
Yes, you were going to ask.
There were one other significant incident that went on in Alaska while I was there.
The Russians got to play it around and sent up their sputnik, which I failed to mention
until you're the other day.
And that got us all going and hiding it.
I won't enough to remember that.
They put that sputnik and orbit and that put us on an alert because we...
A part of our alert procedures were when we have an alert of anything happen, the test
system kind of ceased to exist.
It became a second priority because our first mission was to man the do line.
The early defense early warning system.
So you're out there looking at the...
You're taking a close look at that bird going on.
In Alaska for three years, so you spent a lot of summers and winters in Alaska.
So you got the full force of it all, right?
Got the full force of it.
You need to move on.
You came back.
You were at Fort Benning, US Army instructor training school from the summers of 62 to 65.
And then back to Germany again.
Quickly what was your job the next time when you went back to Germany for one year?
I went back as a...
Mortar David Crockett for tomb sergeant controlling the same weapons that I had been teaching
and bending and doing test work on in Alaska.
There was one significant incident that occurred while I was at Benning.
We lost John F. Kennedy.
That got our heart pumping because everybody prepared the stage and invasion from mainland
US along the Gulf Coast.
We went back to Germany.
This time we went down in the folder gap.
The historic invasion route of everybody into Germany.
That's where we spent time for a year until...
As you said, eyeball with the Russians.
With the Russians.
They always seem to be there.
And then back to the United States, Fort Bragg, military assistance advisory school for 12 weeks.
Where the emphasis you said you knew where you were headed because the emphasis there was
on physical conditioning and learning the Vietnamese language.
That's correct.
You knew that when you got your orders probably five months earlier, six months early.
They said Vietnam.
This is just a stop and transit to prepare you for that mission.
We did the 12 weeks there.
And once again, the emphasis is on language and physical condition.
And you found that you pretty well needed them both.
10th Armored Vietnam, August of 1966 was the first time that you arrived in country.
Things were really heating up about Ben.
Talk about your unit, what your duty was in Vietnam.
And lead us, go ahead and lead us on to the incidents whereby you received your first purple heart.
I was assigned to the...
It's a funny thing.
I was assigned to what at the time was the 10th Arm Division.
And then the Vietnamese Ling Goal...
I said Armored, I meant Armored.
Yes.
But in the Vietnamese Ling Goal, the number 10 is a low number.
Number one is the best with 10 being the worst.
And the 10th Armored Division, the infantry division, they changed the name to the 18th.
Well, that reason only.
So, you know, it didn't get discredited.
It didn't give you the wrong connotation.
But when I went in there initially, we were sitting in the database of Black Virgin Mountain.
Well, several miles away from it.
And the garden is a little village.
And what strikes you initially when you go in country is that the population has been removed from the countryside into the city.
It because the war has caused this.
So, everything out there other than a village that you know is occupied is kind of a free fazon.
We were sitting down here guarding this little village, probably about 5,000 people.
And we ran patrols and who are not out of that place.
Until we had an incident up at another location.
Because that location was down at the edge of the rubber plantation on highway one.
We had up at Vosu.
We had a part of the infantry division of Italian that we got over ran to make the story short.
And we had to get out and go up there.
Now, as an advisor with an infantry battalion, you live and eat and live and die with those people.
That is your unit.
So, we had to walk 75 Ks.
We took us about three days and we arrived up there.
And found that the units had been totally decimated out of 1,000.
People that was only 11 of them left survived.
With the Arvins, you had a four man advisory team, two officers and two enlisted.
Only one man was left out of that four man team and it was an enlisted person who had suffered a chest wound,
destroyed part of his lung.
And he had been injured for three days landing in what amounts to his usual ditch there.
But he survived.
And of course, we were greeted with messages in the village posted on the bulletin board by the Arvins unit,
by the NBA unit that over ran them and killed them all and said that they had awaited us.
Fortunately, it didn't occur.
And the attempt to make it occur, we got a dessert in who was the regimental exo
of that attacking unit and he gave us the information that they were going to attack in about three days,
gave us the total order of battle, everything.
So, we were prepared for them and kind of took care of business, made short work over.
And they posted notices on the village board that they would be back.
We owed them a debt in blood and all that.
You told me that they even produced a list with names on it and your name was on the list.
That's right.
All of the advises, only three of us at that time.
It's two officers in my cell and all three of our names were on there in various pester awards for your head.
Their next attack wasn't quite as bold as the last one because on the first one,
they just attacked and mass which was kind of unusual.
But on the next one, they sit back and mortar this and that's where I received my purple heart first time was in a mortar attack.
Right. It was about a month after the first attack.
About a month.
Yes.
And see, at Vosu, that was a village and it was occupied.
That's where they go to mark and post it, propaganda lists.
The load art was like 4,000 kilometers away and it was unoccupied.
We patrolled it regularly.
There were no human beings living there.
And that's where the attack came from.
The mortar attack initially started from there.
And then that one attack, we lost the senior advisor, a captain from Massachusetts.
And we lost the junior officer advisor with a severe leg wound and they gave me a little present,
I guess I carry for the rest of my life.
I still retain some of the fragments.
You caught some shrapnel, right?
Oh, yes.
Yes.
In my arm, in my hand and in the right side of my body.
They removed all that on the right side of my body.
That I still carry is really in the palm of my hand.
In America having the best doctors, he said, he says, I can take it out.
But you will, I'll do more damage to the hand.
Leave it in there, yourself, or no effect for.
And that was in 1967.
And I haven't had a day's pain with it yet.
Periodically, about once every two or three years, the VA will X-ray it to see if it's moving
because it's located right under those two veins, right there.
This is just kind of steady.
1967, you were 35 years old.
That would be right.
October.
Still a young man.
Yes, yes.
Were you, and we didn't talk about this the other day, but being in that situation, being
in the firefight, what were your thoughts?
World War II veterans tell me all the time their thoughts were, just do your job.
Do your job and survive.
Is that what your thoughts were?
That's where you're scary?
No.
You don't have time to get scared.
And that's basically what happens.
Your training kicks in.
And you take it from there.
And like you say, I was 35 years old.
The draft at that time was from 19 to 26, I believe.
And the difference is, I have spent 10, 12 years in preparation for this moment.
So you just automatically, you believe so much in your training.
And if you didn't want to be there, you wouldn't, of course, you had ample opportunities
to get out.
So you just kind of go on automatic pilot, like the pilot that landed at that plane in
the Hudson River.
And other day, he didn't do a lot of thinking.
It's just kind of automatically do your job.
Right.
And you will find at that time, you will actually,
in the middle of a five, like you sometimes think that, now what the hell am I doing here?
And why am I not afraid?
Because your training takes over.
You don't do stupid things.
You don't run standing straight up if they're shooting at you.
But you really don't get time to be afraid.
Now, when it's all over 30 minutes later, and you're sitting on smoking your first cigarette,
you might not be able to stand back up.
It's a great analogy about the pilot landing in the Hudson.
Let's look at some pictures here real quick of some of the things that you talked about
in some pictures of the young soldier, Jeffrey Bailey.
When was that taken?
That would have been in 1967, I believe.
So that would have been after your first tour in the four years.
It was in between tours.
Yeah, before your second tour of the year.
It was even before...
Before the Chicago.
Before Chicago.
Right, which we'll be talking about next show.
Okay, let's move on.
That one is much earlier.
That's going to be in the late 50s.
Came out of Alaska in 59, so it's going to be in 59 or 60.
You would receive expert marksman?
That's right.
Sightations.
Now, talk about this.
This was during a training exercise, and that's you in the buggy there.
This was just sort of a training exercise.
That's a training day.
That's an organizational day.
It's like the birth theory of the organization.
It's really a training day where everybody takes off because after this, there's the beer
and the food.
That's right.
That's the Fort Hood, Texas.
That's the first sergeant race.
See, all of the first sergeants are being pulled by three people from their unit.
Okay, so this one is training.
This was field day.
This is an athletic event day.
I see.
Okay.
And we wanted to race, by the way.
And you were serious about it because this next one shows that you're back there like
you're riding a buck and Bronco, and there you got your horses there in front of you.
And they were good.
Yeah.
That particular day, we don't have any pitches of it, but we had the staff, the battalion
commander, XO and one, two, three, four, the staff officer pulling against the first
sergeants and selected for tunes like on a rope pool.
And while you dragged the other through the mud, we drove those officers right through
the mud.
Oh, I get this.
Let's go.
We got one more picture.
You had talked about the Black Virgin Mountain.
New about then, the Black Virgin Mountain.
I found this picture on the internet of the Black Virgin Mountain talking about what
we're looking at there.
Well, it speaks for itself except for one thing.
The very top of it was secured by the Army Security Agents.
And this is always one of our secret intelligence gathering people.
They listen to all of the enemy traffic and electronic ease dropping out, mostly.
And for us, I know them.
But they occupied the top of the mountain with their security.
The middle part of the mountain was occupied by the enemy forces.
And the bottom part was occupied by American forces.
So what are we looking at there at the base of the mountain right there in front?
That's a base camp.
I'm not sure who it is.
Right.
Like I said, we were like maybe 15, 20 miles away from it.
But on top of that mountain, you could see for a long way because you're talking about
a mountain just raising up in the middle of the flat.
That's exactly right.
Because actually you're getting on toward the Delta, toward the flat race growing country
down.
And if there's a military advantage in holding high ground, they've got it.
They've got it.
You said that sort of a unique part of your service was that you served in every active
armored division in your 20 years of service.
Talk about that.
Every active armored division, first armored division, old line side, the second armored
division, Hell on Wheels, the third armored division, spearhead division.
And I don't know why they call, I don't know why, what the fourth armored division's
motto was.
I simply don't know.
I don't know if they had one.
But I served it all on four.
And then I never got higher than one in a miracle order in any other division.
First, the infantry division, first care division, fourth armored division, and three preceding.
And every one of those armored division, like I said, has a slogan.
The first armored old line side was Padden's nickname.
The Hell on Wheels thing was another one of his gimmicks.
The spearhead division was Eisenhower's thing.
Because he liked the spearhead as a text with the armor of the spearhead division, the
third armored division.
Exactly.
But when you left me at the arm after your first tour, did you have a feeling that you
would be back?
I really didn't at that time, not that I recall, because we were talking about getting out
of there in 1967.
And we had been in there for a number of years in back 64, 65.
But I figured that there was always that chance.
And I wasn't about to volunteer to go back.
My wife will not believe that I didn't volunteer to go to Vietnam the first time.
Well I did, but they refused it.
Right.
And sent me to Germany.
I didn't volunteer the second time.
They said he wanted to go then Wilson and I.
You and your wife have been married for some 53 years.
53 years?
53 years.
She's been along for the right.
She's been along for it.
And a military wife, especially one that sees her husband go off to Vietnam twice.
Yes.
It takes special person.
It does.
And you have to have a lot of respect for these people.
And they demanded and they get it.
Because first of all, if you're out of their life as the primary breadwinner or the controlling
force you to head of the family for a year, and they get along just fine without you
supervision or authority or cooperation, you have to kind of do some adjustments when
you get back.
Right.
Next week we're going to talk about two other aspects of your service.
Your service as we mentioned in the streets of South Side Chicago.
And we're going to talk about your second tour of Vietnam and what you've been doing since
1973 when you retired from the military.
But you came back after your first tour of Vietnam and back to Fort Hood, is that right?
Back to Fort Hood.
We came back to Fort Hood once again.
During the first Army Division, an old unit I'd been in before, out of four trips to Fort
Hood and one in Louisiana with the first Army Division, I only served in two units.
One with the 634th Army of the Infantry Battalion.
All the rest of them was with this one infantry battalion.
That's a twice the same company.
So it was like my home away from home.
Yeah, you told me you had five tours with the first Army Division.
That's right.
Fort Hood.
You got to know them well.
Got to know them.
I know Fort Hood as well as I'm particularly the hills and how the creeks in the stream.
There's not a lot of training area.
There's not a lot you don't know how to feel.
We're going to learn more of it next week.
Thanks.
We'll be back next week.
Thank you.
I'm Tom Turbivill, joint first sergeant, Jeff Rebailly, and me next week on Veterans
of the Valley.
Thank you.